Hello and welcome back.
So in the last lesson we served up our local host a thousand which is our Gatsby application and in
it we saw that right away we have these two pages.
This first page has this little astronaut picture on it.
And the second page is just a welcome to page two that we can navigate back to PAGE ONE.
Now this is really interesting because this actually allows us to highlight one of the key features
in Gatsby which is that inside of this pages folder as long as you add a new file here Gatsby will automatically
try to load and new page for you.
Meaning that it will build a new page based on the title of the file that you write.
And inside of this file index J.S. This is actually our astronaut page.
And what it is is just importing a react.
And it's a functional component that leverages this link.
Now this link component that we get from Gatsby is pretty much a Gatsby version of the react router
link meaning that navigation happens with this link component.
We also import this layout image and SEO component.
Now these are just components that come by default with Gatsby and they're actually quite simple the
layout component essentially wraps around some bunch of HCM all elements or components and it provides
some styling to it as well as it provides it some data that will look at a little later the image component
allows us to do lazy loading with images and optimizing those images.
It's just a Gatsby methodology that makes images more performance on the Web.
And then the FCO component is meant exactly for search engine optimization.
You can pass it a title a description a lang a meta or any of these other properties that you see right
here.
So what this does is it makes search engine crawlers more performance for our Web site so that we shop
hire when people might be googling for things related to what we write inside of our block.
Now we will use some of these components when we actually build out our blog posts.
But for now let's go back to looking at our pages folder.
So as I explained earlier if you add a new file Gatsby will generate a new route for you inside of your
application based on the name of the file that you created.
So let's actually just make a new file called Page 3.
Dot J as you can name this whatever you want but I'm just gonna call it page three.
I'm going to take this code from page 2 and just remove some things that we don't need and what I'm
going to do is simply just generate an H1 rename to this to third page and then say hello from the third
page
now as long as we export something out that is a component as the default from this file Gatsby will
know to use this component for that route.
So let's test this out.
If we go back to our application and navigate to our new Page Three we'll see that we have our helo
from the third page.
So this is what's really great about Gatsby.
It's really easy to build new routes and new pages just by adding files to our pages folder and making
sure we export as the default some component that allows Gatsby to use that as the page that it's trying
to render.
Now another great thing we actually get with our pages is access to this forum for now this for four
page Gatsby will automatically know to use in live production if the user navigates to some page that
doesn't exist.
So inside of our development server if we go to say something like this we'll see that it takes us to
a page that tells us actually all of the routes we have available to access.
But in life production it will end up showing this for a four page.
And this is one of the nice things about using Gatsby for a more opinionated framework like this.
It has made a lot of these decisions for us in terms of how to handle routing how to set up pages because
unlike a normal react application that just rolls with we act you have to include all of the different
libraries that you want to include in order to handle routing in order to handle for fours as you'll
see inside of our course.
We have to make those decisions for ourselves.
But with Gatsby you just have to learn how Gatsby does certain things and then follow along with the
way that Gatsby has set up the project.
So for us in this case it's just a matter of how do we handle the pages that we want to add to our application.
So conceptually we just have to keep this in mind if we want to make new pages we add them into this
page folder and the page root will be named whatever name we've given to our files.
Now this does bring me to a very important caveat about Gatsby because Gatsby builds all of our static
pages ahead of time.
We do not dynamically compose them which means that the way that you're used to structuring your react
code is going to be a little different.
Now one thing that you might have noticed is that every one of our pages is wrapped inside of our layout
component and the layout component we get with Gatsby with this start up project.
Now the reason for this is because we need to actually render the header and the footer and any consistent
styling between the pages every single time.
Now why is it this way.
Well if you remember in the last lesson we talked about Gatsby being a static site generator meaning
that Gatsby needs to actually build those pages on the build step meaning that it generates every single
pages complete h t email that the user needs on their browser in order to view the page.
So if we want this header and footer on every single page that we have including our route including
page two and including the new page three component that we built and any other further page we need
to always provide it with all of the components and all of the styling for that page on that pages coat.
This is different from a typical react application where you might have different levels of components
that will house the routes that hold the subsequent nested components inside as you might see when you
build something in react using a library like react writer Dom in react or Dom you might have a high
level app component that has root components inside that will then lead to further nested trees of components
meaning that you don't have to actually dynamically compose this code every single time and every single
component.
If you want to render a header again this is a caveat of statically generate a Web sites because statically
generate a Web sites need to generate static HCM Mal for every single page.
So how you want that page to look needs to have everything on it already.
In order for it to generate that page so hopefully that makes sense because that's a big caveat.
A built building are pages inside of Gatsby now with that in mind.
One other thing about the layout is we'll see here that we are using a little bit of graph.
Well now you might be familiar with everything here especially if you've taken the course as we've learned
with graph Q all the difference here is that Gatsby has provided its own hook called use static query
you start a query is a custom hook that Gatsby wrote that allows you to extract the value of whatever
query you're making against the graph Q Well in order to pluck out the data now as you can see here
what their query is querying is this thing called site with this object that calls for the metadata.
Now this metadata is what we saw inside of our Gatsby config.
This site metadata contains a title description an author by default which you can pull off using graph
Q all and adding that query that we saw in the layout component and by doing so we're now able to pluck
off that title that we've stored in our config and then render it inside of this layout component so
that we don't have to fetch it inside of every single one of our page components.
Now for example if we wanted to change the title if we go to our config object and we change the title
here to Eve was blog we'll actually see that we get that update.
So that's one of the great things as well is that if we wanted to keep something on our website that
we needed to use consistently on all of our pages probably through our layout of some kind.
We can easily just change it inside of the site metadata.
Now we're definitely going to take a deeper look at the graph Q all section that comes with Gatsby and
we're gonna do that in the next lesson.
So I'll see you in the next lesson.